	
CS 581: Final Project (suggestions)
CS 581 (Fall 2026) Final Project Suggestions
The textbook (Computational Phylogenetics: An Introduction
	to Designing Methods for Phylogeny Estimation) has several
	suggestions for
	projects, many of which would be good for this course.
	You may also have your own ideas for a project!
	The suggestions below are just to get you started with thinking
	about what you might do.
(Note, however, that some projects--especially those that
evaluate and explore Bayesian methods, may be too computationally
intensive to do as a course project, and would be better as a 
post-581 project.)
Also, please note that the course project is evaluated with 
respect to writing (including style, low-level writing, and reproducibility)
as well as the content. 
Writing counts 25% of the grade!
Specific projects of  current interest to me (TW)
Note: projects that are probably fairly straightforward (and so should be easy for
students in CS 581 who have basic coding skills) are put in 
boldface
.
 Projects related to TIPP (see 
the TIPP paper
) and its  descendents, including
the TIPP3 preprint
.
 Evaluate taxon identification methods, comparing
methods that place into taxonomies (like TIPP) to methods that place
 into a gene tree and then inherit
the taxonomic information from the leaf labels.
 For TIPP, TIPP2, and TIPP3, we used BLAST to assign reads to marker
genes.  Evaluate HIPPI in this context (see 
the HIPPI paper
).
 Evaluate TIPP3 with BSCAMPP(p) instead of BSCAMPP(e)
(see 
the BSCAMPP preprint
).
 Projects related to gene and species tree estimation
 Design a divide-and-conquer strategy that uses supertree methods, and evaluate in comparison to GTM. 
 Test GTM  (see 
the GTM paper
) in a pipeline with methods other than maximum likelihood
(e.g., neighbor joining or FastME).
 Test GTM  and TreeMerge (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz344), two Disjoint Tree Merger methods,
under conditions with different model tree topologies (balanced vs. 
caterpillar).  
More generally, see if you can find a condition where GTM is less
accurate than TreeMerge.
 Develop a new Disjoint Tree Merger pipeline and test
it in comparison to GTM
 Develop a new quartet amalgamation method
and compare to Quartets Max Cut (DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2008.133)
and other quartet amalgamation methods
 Develop techniques for rooting gene trees with respect to 
species trees that are not fully resolved (expand on ideas in NOTUNG)
Evaluate methods for tree construction and alignment estimation in the presence of rogue taxa (that are nevertheless homologs); how does the inclusion of 
the rogue taxa impact the accuracy of the alignment or tree restricted to the non-rogue taxa?
Also consider whether removing rogue taxa before alignment and tree estimation improves accuracy.
 Projects related to ensembles of HMMs
  Develop a rigorous way of designing ensembles of profile HMMs (think
cross-validation)
 Extend design or use of ensemble of HMMs to 
some other generative model (not pHMMs)
 Projects related to multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
 Projects about collections of alignments
 Motivation: There are many cases where we are given a collection of MSAs on the same
set of sequences, including (a) using different MSA methods on the same input,
(b) looking at iterative methods (like PASTA) that produce a new MSA in each iteration,
(c) using the same MSA method but with different parameters,
(d) using a method like BAli-Phy, which produces a set of alignments during 
its MCMC run. 
We'd like to do different things with this set. 
A course project could be to take just one of the problems below, come up with 
a few ways to solve the problem, and evaluate whether your solution is useful (or accurate).
 get a point estimate (i.e., a single MSA) from the set (see what BAli-Phy does, 
but also look at M-Coffee)
  use the set to annotate a given alignment in terms of the reliability of
each site, 
 use the alignments to come up with a better estimate of the evolutionary tree
for the sequences,
 use the alignments to come up with a better profile HMM for the sequences.
 come up with a compact representation of the set of alignments
 Projects specifically for protein MSA 
Many protein MSA methods have been evaluated only using
a limited set of benchmark datasets, or only using TC and sometimes SP-score.
Take some such method and improve the evaluation.
See if any of the better performing ones can be modified to work with DNA sequences.
 Projects related to learnMSA2
The learnMSA2 paper
.
The evaluation of learnMSA2 was done only using HomFam, and only explored
SP-score and TC score. 
Evaluate learnMSA on other protein benchmarks and also using Modeler score.
For this, exploring a wide range of datasets (in terms of number of
sequences, percent ID, etc.)  is important.
It seems possible that learnMSA2 could be used as the base method within
MAGUS, PASTA, etc.  Try one of these and see how well it works.
See if the HMM in learnMSA2 can be used for protein classification.
If so, use it in other tools, such as for HIPPI
 Projects related to MAGUS
 The goal here is to improve MAGUS if possible. You should look at both the 
original paper and the follow-up, on Recursive-MAGUS.
MAGUS is run using just one iteration.  Evaluate the impact of iteration on
MAGUS accuracy.
 Modify the MAGUS design by using a different clustering method
instead of the Markov Clustering algorithm within GCM.
MAGUS has mainly been studied for use with MAFFT.  Now that there are new MSA methods, study MAGUS with different base methods.
(Start by finding methods that are more accurate than MAGUS and MAFFT-l-insi)
 Modify the impact of changing  how the "backbone alignment" subsets are selected.
 Projects related to adding sequences into an alignment (e.g., UPP, WITCH, EMMA, etc.)
Most of these methods have been designed for handling sequences that are 
short but not necessarily sequences that are long nor sequences that are
reads (and so have errors).  Explore one of these differences.
Evaluate  UPP and other existing MSA methods on datasets with sequence length
heterogeneity where some sequences are very  long (and possibly 
design a new method that addresses this problem better)
 Develop and test methods for merging three or more disjoint alignments of different lengths (compare to GCM in MAGUS)
 Projects comparing existing methods 
Test Prank in comparison to MAFFT as evolutionary diameter
and deviation from a clock increase, when
given a guide tree
 Evaluate Prank or Probcons within PASTA or MAGUS, and compare 
to default MAGUS and PASTA
 Compare Regressive (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0333-6) to PASTA
and MAGUS
 Parallel algorithms projects:
 Parallelize UPP (multiple sequence alignment, by Nam-phuong Nguyen et al.)
 Parallelize GTM (Guide Tree Merger, by Vlad Smirnov and me)
 Parallelize Balanced Minimum Evolution within FastME
 Historical linguistics
 For these problems, see 
Canby et al.,Transactions of the Philological society
. 
Evaluate different Bayesian  methods (e.g., BEAST) in comparison to 
Gray and Atkinson on simulated data 
 Run  maximum likelihood methods on simulated data for
language evolution 
Suggestions from prior years
Projects related to multiple sequence alignment
 Modify the sequence evolution simulator Indelible
	(Fletcher and Yang) so that it allows
	the root sequence to be specified.
	The code is open source and written in C++.
 Compare methods that can align two or more alignments, and evaluate
	for accuracy on simulated datasets.
	Examples of such methods: Opal, Muscle, Prime, and GCM.
 Test POY using gap penalties that are not affine gap penalties
	for accuracy.
 Examine ways of computing a consensus alignment on the output from
	PASTA, and evaluate for accuracy in comparison to the single alignment
	returned by PASTA.
	For example, compute the posterior
	decoding of a random sample of the alignments PASTA computes (after
	removing the first few alignments).
	To compute the posterior decoding, you can install 
	BAli-Phy (Redelings and Suchard), using
	the directions on the website:
	http://balip-phy.org/README.html#installation. 
	Once the software is installed, there is a folder of
	executable files called "bin", and within that
	folder
	there is a folder called "alignment-max".
	Examine ways to annotate the sites in a multiple sequence alignment
	for reliability, based on examining
	a set of alternate alignments obtained
	by running a basic alignment method using different strategies
	(e.g., different parameter settings).
	Find codes for computing a point estimate of
	an alignment given 
	an arbitrary set of multiple sequence alignments
	(e.g., the posterior decoding algorithm in BAli-Phy, but also
	look at T-Coffee), and compare them for accuracy and/or scalability.
	Explore BAli-Phy to see if you can improve it.
	For example, determine if you can use it 
         to find a tree given a fixed alignment.
	or to find the best alignment on a fixed tree.
	In "Benchmarking statistical multiple sequence alignment" (bioRxiv doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/304659), my students and I showed a strange trend in which
	BAli-Phy did very well on simulated 
	amino acid
	datasets but not very well 
	on biological amino acid datasets.
	Try to do this evaluation on nucleotide datasets.
Evaluate the impact of violating the strict molecular clock on
	either multiple sequence alignment or phylogenetic tree estimation,
	especially when using statistical methods (such as
	BAli-Phy, Prank, etc.).
Projects related to supertree estimation or phylogenomic species tree estimation
Develop a good method for weighted quartet tree amalgamation.
	Compare to Weighted Quartets MaxCut by Avni et al. (2014), 
	DOI: 10.1093/sysbio/syu087.
	Evaluate Weighted Quartets MaxCut (Avni et al. 2014)
	as a supertree method on the SMIDgen datasets (Swenson et al.).
	Implement a parallel version of some good supertree method, such as
	FastRFS (Vachaspati and Warnow), 
	Quartets MaxCut (Snir and Rao), etc.
	Quartet-based supertree methods have computational limitations
	in that they depend on computing all quartet trees.
	Evaluate variants  that 
	only require computing a subset of the quartet trees.
	Evaluate the impact of multiple sequence alignment error on
	SVDquartets (Chifman and Kubatko, as implemented in PAUP*).
Projects related to maximum likelihood gene tree estimation
Evaluate the impact of the starting tree on FastTree-2.
 ML methods have been explored in terms of the impact of the
	tree topology or the ML score, and in general RAxML has been
	found to be better than other methods for ML score but only rarely
	better than FastTree-2 in terms of tree topology.
	Try to characterize the conditions in which RAxML is generally
	more accurate than FastTree-2 (or other ML methods) for tree topology.
Modify some maximum likelihood method to take support values
	per site into account.
Develop a new Disjoint Tree Merger (DTM) method, and test it
        in comparison to GTM.
Evaluate the impact of violating the strict molecular clock on
	on phylogenetic tree estimation,
	especially when using statistical methods such as
	BAli-Phy.
Evaluate the impact of tree shape (e.g., the Aldous beta-splitting
	model) on tree estimation. 
Other
Develop a method that can compute a tree from an
	incomplete dissimilarity
	matrix (i.e., matrices where some of the entries
	do not have  
	values).
	Compare to the "NJ*" methods from
	Criscuolo and Gascuel (2008),
	https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-9-166,
	on some simulated datasets.
Find an application area (other than
	biological phylogenetics) where tree estimation (especially of
	large datasets) is important and not necessarily solved well, 
	and where accuracy can be measured.
	Try to develop a new approach to tree estimation,
	and compare to the current best methods.
Explore the "ensemble of profile HMMs" approach
	with some other generative model
        or some other biological application
	Develop a method that  performs taxon identification of 
	sequences
	that takes the following as input:
	a taxonomy T and a tree T' in which
	all but one of the leaves is assigned
	a taxonomic label using T.
	Test your method 
	where T' is produced by adding
	a single short sequence (i.e., read) into
	an  estimated maximum likelihood
	tree on full length sequences for a single gene.
	Thus, your method will rely on a phylogenetic placement
	method.
	Develop a divide-and-conquer approach to phylogenetic
	network estimation, and test it.
	Test divide-and-conquer DTM methods for use
	with genome rearrangement phylogeny estimation methods.
	Find some published dataset and re-analyze it
	using the new methods for phylogeny estimation
	(either gene trees or species trees).
