--- slide 1 ---
Phylogenomics – part 2
							CS 581
						Fall 2026
			
--- slide 2 ---
Today’s lecture
Previously, we focused on estimating species trees in the presence of incomplete lineage sorting (ILS)
Today: 
Some more theory about species tree estimation in the presence of ILS
Estimating species trees in the presence of gene duplication and loss (GDL)
Estimating species trees in the presence of random horizontal gene transfer (HGT)

--- slide 3 ---
Orangutan
Gorilla
Chimpanzee
Human
From the Tree of the Life Website,University of Arizona
Phylogeny(evolutionary tree)
--- slide 4 ---
Statistical Consistency
error
Data

--- slide 5 ---
Genome-scale data?
error
Data

--- slide 6 ---
Questions 
Is the model tree identifiable?
Which estimation methods are statistically consistent under this model?
How much data does the method need to estimate the model tree correctly with high probability (i.e., what is the method’s sample complexity)?
--- slide 7 ---
				        Phylogenomics 
Phylogeny + genomics = genome-scale phylogeny estimation
. 
--- slide 8 ---
Multiple causes for discord, including 
Incomplete Lineage Sorting (ILS), 
Gene Duplication and Loss (GDL), and
Hybridization and Horizontal Gene Transfer 
--- slide 9 ---
Multiple causes for discord, including 
Incomplete Lineage Sorting (ILS), 
Gene Duplication and Loss (GDL), and
Hybridization and Horizontal Gene Transfer 
--- slide 10 ---
Major challenge:
Massive gene tree heterogeneity consistent with ILS
--- slide 11 ---
Impact of Gene Tree Estimation Error(from Molloy and Warnow 2017)
Error is fraction
of bipartitions
that are not 
recovered
Note:
Summary
methods
better than
CA-ML
for low
GTEE,
then worse!
--- slide 12 ---
Statistical Consistency for summary methods
error
Data

Data are gene trees, presumed to be randomly sampled true gene trees.
--- slide 13 ---
Multiple studies show that summary methods can be less accurate than concatenation in the presence of high gene tree estimation error.
Genome-scale data includes a range of markers, not all of which have substantial signal.  Furthermore, removing sites due to model violations reduces signal.  
Some researchers also argue that “gene trees” should be based on very short alignments, to avoid intra-locus recombination. 

		
Gene tree estimation error: key issue in the debate
--- slide 14 ---
Question #1: Do any summary methods converge to the species tree as the number of loci increase, but where each locus has only a constant number of sites? 
Answer #1: Roch & Warnow, Syst Biol, March 2015:
Strict molecular clock: Yes for some new methods, even for a single site per locus
No clock: Unknown for all methods, including 	     MP-EST, ASTRAL, etc.

S. Roch and T. Warnow. "On the robustness to gene tree estimation error (or lack thereof)
of coalescent-based species tree methods", Systematic Biology, 64(4):663-676, 2015
What about performance on bounded number of sites?
--- slide 15 ---
Question #1: Do any summary methods converge to the species tree as the number of loci increase, but where each locus has only a constant number of sites?  
Answer #2: Roch, Nute, & Warnow, Syst Biol 2019.
No! Summary methods are not only not consistent, they can be positively misleading! (Felsenstein Zone)
What about performance on bounded number of sites?
--- slide 16 ---
Question #2: What about concatenation using maximum likelihood?  
Answer: Roch, Nute, & Warnow, Syst Biol 2019
Not if fully partitioned! Concatenation using maximum likelihood, if fully partitioned is also not consistent and can be positively misleading (even if there is NO ILS)! (Felsenstein Zone)
What about performance on bounded number of sites?
--- slide 17 ---
Statistically consistent methods
Coalescent-based summary methods: Estimate gene trees, and then combine together (ASTRAL, ASTRID, MP-EST, NJst, and others)

Co-estimation methods:  Co-estimate gene trees and species trees (TOO EXPENSIVE)

Site-based methods:  estimate the species tree from the concatenated alignment, and do not estimate gene trees (NOT WELL STUDIED)
--- slide 18 ---
Statistically consistent methods (??)
Coalescent-based summary methods: Estimate gene trees, and then combine together (ASTRAL, ASTRID, MP-EST, NJst, and others)

Co-estimation methods:  Co-estimate gene trees and species trees (TOO EXPENSIVE)

Site-based methods:  estimate the species tree from the concatenated alignment, and do not estimate gene trees (NOT WELL STUDIED)
--- slide 19 ---
Multiple causes for discord, including 
Incomplete Lineage Sorting (ILS), 
Gene Duplication and Loss (GDL), and
Hybridization and Horizontal Gene Transfer 
--- slide 20 ---
1KP: Thousand Transcriptome Project
103 plant transcriptomes, 400-800 single copy “genes”
Next phase will be much bigger
Wickett, Mirarab et al., PNAS 2014
G. Ka-Shu Wong
U Alberta
N. Wickett
Northwestern
J. Leebens-Mack
U Georgia
N. Matasci
iPlant
T. Warnow,                S. Mirarab,                N. Nguyen
UT-Austin                  UT-Austin                 UT-Austin
Major Challenge:
Multi-copy genes omitted (9500 -> 400)
Massive gene tree heterogeneity consistent with ILS
--- slide 21 ---
--- slide 22 ---
New Results (Legried et al.)
Under the GDL model, the unrooted species tree topology is identifiable from the distribution of unrooted gene family trees (MUL-trees) 
Proof establishes that for every four species, the most probable quartet tree is the same as the species tree
Legried, Molloy, Warnow, and Roch. RECOMB and J. Computational Biology 2020.
--- slide 23 ---
New Results (Legried et al.)
Under the GDL model, the unrooted species tree topology is identifiable from the distribution of unrooted gene family trees (MUL-trees) 
Corollary: ASTRAL-multi (i.e., ASTRAL designed for multi-individual gene trees) and ASTRAL-One are statistically consistent under GDL models
Legried, Molloy, Warnow, and Roch. RECOMB and J. Computational Biology 2020.
--- slide 24 ---
Empirical performance vs Theory
Unknown if distance-based species tree estimation (e.g., ASTRID-multi) is statistically consistent under GDL models
ASTRAL-multi is statistically consistent, but other methods that are not established to be statistically consistent have better accuracy
--- slide 25 ---
ASTRAL-Pro
New variant of ASTRAL for MUL-trees
Algorithm:
”Root and tag” the gene trees
Tagging means determining for each node if it is a duplication of speciation node. 
Rooting is done to minimize total number of DUPLICATIONS + LOSSES
Weight quartet trees under the assumption of correct rooting and tagging
Solve the same optimization problem (MQSST)
--- slide 26 ---
ASTRAL-Pro
New variant of ASTRAL for MUL-trees
Algorithm:
”Root and tag” the gene trees
Note: Not at all obvious how to do this well! But if ASTRAL-Pro correctly roots and tags the gene trees, then the method is statistically consistent under GDL
Weight quartet trees under the assumption of correct rooting and tagging
Solve the same optimization problem (MQSST)
--- slide 27 ---
DISCO (Willson et al., Systematic Biology 2022)
Input: Set of gene family trees
Output: Set of single copy gene trees (obtained by decomposing gene family trees)
Technique:
Use ASTRAL-Pro to root and tag each gene family tree
Decompose from the “bottom-up”, aiming to keep at least one large subtree
Follow with method that requires single-copy genes (e.g., ASTRAL, ASTRID, Concatenation Analysis using maximum likelihood)

Variants we examined: ASTRID-DISCO, ASTRAL-DISCO, CA-DISCO

--- slide 28 ---
--- slide 29 ---
Results on 101 species with GDL and ILS
--- slide 30 ---
Results on 1000 species and 1000 genes
--- slide 31 ---
Genome-scale discordance: very complex
--- slide 32 ---
What about HGT?
HGT also makes heterogeneous gene trees
Under some assumptions of random HGT operating, it may be possible to define the “underlying” species tree.
Statistical consistency of quartet-based methods for computing the underlying species tree established by:
Roch & Snir, JCB 2013
Daskalakis & Roch, arXiv 2015
Simulation study (Davidson et al. 2015) shows ASTRAL and wQMC (Snir et al.) more accurate than concatenation and NJst when ILS+HGT is present
--- slide 33 ---
Accuracy in the presence of HGT + ILS
Davidson et al., RECOMB-CG, BMC Genomics 2015
--- slide 34 ---
Gene trees -> Species trees, using Quartet Trees
Recurring theme: the most probable quartet tree is the species tree for:
ILS (Multi-species coalescent): Allman et al.
GDL: Legried et al
ILS+GDL (DLCOAL) – Martin and Eulenstein  Bioinf 2021
Random (but bounded) HGT: Snir & Roch, Daskalakis & Roch
Hence, quartet-based species tree estimation (from gene trees) is often statistically consistent, if performed properly.
Finding MQSST (within a constrained search space) a powerful approach that maintains consistency and is computationally efficient
Interestingly, MQSST is also fairly robust
--- slide 35 ---
(Some) Open Questions 
Which other existing species tree estimation methods are statistically consistent under GDL and DLCOAL models?  
Is ASTRAL-Pro statistically consistent for GDL under some random model of error for rooting and tagging?
What is the sample complexity for ASTRID and NJst under the  MSC?
Can we find a distance correction for GDL so that ASTRID and NJst are statistically consistent under GDL models?
Can we improve DISCO? 
Can we design better quartet amalgamation methods?
How can we scale concatenation to large datasets?
What can we do about phylogenetic networks?