Challenges in Computational
  Linguistic Phylogenetics
          Tandy Warnow
  Department of Computer Science
        University of Illinois
   Indo-European languages




From linguistica.tribe.net
     Controversies for IE history
• Subgrouping: Other than the 10 major subgroups, what is likely
  to be true? In particular, what about
   – Italo-Celtic
   – Greco-Armenian
   – Anatolian + Tocharian
   – Satem Core (Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic)
   – Location of Germanic
      Other questions about IE

• Where is the IE homeland?
• When did Proto-IE end?
• What was life like for the speakers of proto-Indo-
  European (PIE)?
The Anatolian hypothesis
  (from wikipedia.org)




Date for PIE ~7000 BCE
         The Kurgan Expansion
• Date of PIE ~4000 BCE.
• Map of Indo-European migrations from ca. 4000 to 1000 BC
  according to the Kurgan model
• From http://indo-european.eu/wiki
  Estimating the date and homeland of the
           proto-Indo-Europeans
• Step 1: Estimate the phylogeny
• Step 2: Reconstruct words for proto-Indo-
  European (and for intermediate proto-
  languages)
• Step 3: Use archaeological evidence to
  constrain dates and geographic locations
  of the proto-languages
 Possible Indo-European tree
(Ringe, Warnow and Taylor 2000)



                                                                          Anatolian


      Vedic
                  Greek                         Italic
  Iranian


                                                         Celtic   Tocharian

                          Germanic
                  Armenian

     Baltic   Slavic

                                     Albanian
Another possible Indo-European tree
                (Gray & Atkinson, 2004)




Italic Gmc. Celtic Baltic Slavic Alb. Indic Iranian Armenian Greek Toch. Anatolian
                     This talk
• Linguistic data and the Ringe-Warnow analyses of the
  Indo-European language family
• Comparison of different phylogenetic methods on Indo-
  European datasets (Nakhleh et al., Transactions of the
  Philological Society 2005)
• Perfect Phylogenetic Networks (Nakhleh et al., Language
  2005)
• Simulation study evaluating different phylogenetic
  methods (Barbançon et al., Diachronica 2013)
• Discussion and Future work
         The Computational Historical Linguistics Project

Collaboration with Don Ringe began
in 1994; 17 papers since then, and two
NSF grants.

Dataset generation by Ringe and Ann Taylor
(then a postdoc with Ringe, now Senior Lecturer
at York University).

Method development with Luay Nakhleh (then
my student, now Associate Professor at
Rice University), Steve Evans (Prof. Statistics,
Berkeley). Simulation study with Francois
Barbanson (then my postdoc).

Ongoing work in IE with Ringe.




  http://web.engr.illinois.edu/~warnow/histling.html
   Indo-European languages




From linguistica.tribe.net
     Historical Linguistic Data
• A character is a function that maps a set of
  languages, L, to a set of states.

• Three kinds of characters:
  – Phonological (sound changes)
  – Lexical (meanings based on a wordlist)
  – Morphological (especially inflectional)
     Homoplasy-free evolution
• When a character changes                            0
  state, it changes to a new
  state not in the tree; i.e.,
  there is no homoplasy
  (character reversal or
  parallel evolution)
                                              0
• First inferred for weird                                    1
  innovations in phonological
  characters and
  morphological characters in         0
  the 19th century, and used to
  establish all the major
  subgroups within IE             0       0       0       1       1
                   Sound changes
•    Many sound changes are natural, and should not be used for
     phylogenetic reconstruction.
•    Others are bizarre, or are composed of a sequence of simple
     sound changes. These are useful for subgrouping purposes.
     Example: Grimm’s Law.
    1.   Proto-Indo-European voiceless stops change into voiceless fricatives.
    2.   Proto-Indo-European voiced stops become voiceless stops.
    3.   Proto-Indo-European voiced aspirated stops become voiced
         fricatives.
An Indo-European lexical character: ‘hand’.


Data.
Hittite       kissar          Lithuanian      rankà             Old Prussian rānkan (acc.)
Armenian      jeṙn            Old English     hand              Latvian      ròka
Greek         χείρ /kʰé:r/    Old Irish       lám               Gothic       handus
Albanian      dorë            Latin           manus             Old Norse    hǫnd
Tocharian B   ṣar             Luvian          īssaris           OHG          hant
Vedic         hástas          Lycian          izredi (instr.)   Welsh        llaw
Avestan       zastō           Tocharian A tsar                  Oscan        manim (acc.)
OCS           rǫka            Old Persian     dasta             Umbrian      manf (acc. pl.)
 Semantic slot for hand – coded
(Partitioned into cognate classes)
Proto-Indo-European *pl̥ ́h2meh2 ‘flat hand’ (cf. Homeric Greek palámɛ:)
        > Proto-Celtic *lāmā ‘hand’
               > Old Irish lám
               > Welch llaw
Proto-Germanic *handuz ‘hand’
        > Gothic handus
        >→ Runic Norse *handu (ending influenced by a different noun class)
               > Old Norse hǫnd
        > Proto-West Germanic *handu
               > Old English hand
               > Old High German hant
Proto-Italic *man- ‘hand’
        > Latin manus (transferred into the u-stems)
        >→ Proto-Sabellian *man-
               > Oscan *manis > *mans, accusative manim (transf. into the i-stems)
               > Umbrian *man-, accusative plural manf
     Lexical characters can also
      evolve without homoplasy
• For every cognate                           1
  class, the nodes of the
  tree in that class should
  form a connected
  subset - as long as                 1
  there is no undetected                              1

  borrowing nor parallel
  semantic shift.                 0


                              0       0   1       1       2
            Our (RWT) Data
• Ringe & Taylor (2002)
   – 259 lexical
   – 13 morphological
   – 22 phonological
• These data have cognate judgments estimated by
  Ringe and Taylor, and vetted by other Indo-
  Europeanists. (Alternate encodings were tested, and
  mostly did not change the reconstruction.)
• Polymorphic characters, and characters known to
  evolve in parallel, were removed.
       Differences between different
                 characters
• Lexical: most easily borrowed (most borrowings detectable),
  and homoplasy relatively frequent (we estimate about 25-
  30% overall for our wordlist, but a much smaller percentage
  for basic vocabulary).
• Phonological: can still be borrowed but much less likely than
  lexical. Complex phonological characters are infrequently (if
  ever) homoplastic, although simple phonological characters
  very often homoplastic.
• Morphological: least easily borrowed, least likely to be
  homoplastic.
           Our methods/models
• Ringe & Warnow Almost Perfect Phylogeny: most
  characters evolve without homoplasy under a no-common-
  mechanism assumption (various publications since 1995)
• Ringe, Warnow, & Nakhleh Perfect Phylogenetic
  Network: extends APP model to allow for borrowing, but
  assumes homoplasy-free evolution for all characters
  (Language, 2005)
• Warnow, Evans, Ringe & Nakhleh Extended Markov
  model: parameterizes PPN and allows for homoplasy
  provided that homoplastic states can be identified from
  the data (Cambridge University Press)
  First analysis: Almost Perfect Phylogeny

• The original dataset contained 375 characters (336
  lexical, 17 morphological, and 22 phonological).
• We screened the dataset to eliminate characters
  likely to evolve homoplastically or by borrowing.
• On this reduced dataset (259 lexical, 13
  morphological, 22 phonological), we attempted to
  maximize the number of compatible characters while
  requiring that certain of the morphological and
  phonological characters be compatible.
  (Computational problem NP-hard.)
             Indo-European Tree
(95% of the characters compatible)



                                                                         Anatolian


     Vedic
                 Greek                         Italic
 Iranian


                                                        Celtic   Tocharian

                         Germanic
                 Armenian

    Baltic   Slavic

                                    Albanian
            Second attempt: PPN
• We explain the remaining incompatible characters by inferring
  previously undetected borrowing.
• We attempted to find a PPN (perfect phylogenetic network)
  with the smallest number of contact edges, borrowing events,
  and with maximal feasibility with respect to the historical
  record. (Computational problems NP-hard).
• Our analysis produced one solution with only three contact
  edges that optimized each of the criteria. Two of the contact
  edges are well-supported.
Modelling borrowing: Networks
 and Trees within Networks
    Perfect Phylogenetic Networks

  Problem formulation
  • Input: set of languages described by
    characters
  • Output: Network on which all characters
    evolve without homoplasy, but can be
    borrowed

Nakhleh, Ringe, and Warnow, 2005. Language.
Perfect Phylogenetic Network
  (all characters compatible)



                                                                    Anatolian


     Vedic
                 Greek                    Italic
 Iranian


                                                   Celtic   Tocharian

                         Germanic
                 Armenian

    Baltic   Slavic

                                    Albanian


     L. Nakhleh, D. Ringe, and T. Warnow, LANGUAGE, 2005
                 Comments
• This network is very tree-like (only three
  contact edges needed to explain the data.
• Two of the three contact edges are strongly
  supported by the data (many characters are
  borrowed).
• If the third contact edge is removed, then the
  evolution of the remaining (two) incompatible
  characters needs to be explained. Probably this
  is parallel semantic shift.
              Other IE analyses
Note: many reconstructions of IE have been done, but produce
   different histories which differ in significant ways

Possible issues:
   Dataset (modern vs. ancient data, errors in the cognancy
           judgments, lexical vs. all types of characters,
           screened vs. unscreened)
   Translation of multi-state data to binary data
   Reconstruction method
Another possible Indo-European tree
                (Gray & Atkinson, 2004)




Italic Gmc. Celtic Baltic Slavic Alb. Indic Iranian Armenian Greek Toch. Anatolian



           Based only on lexical characters – with “binary encoding”
    The performance of methods on an IE data set,
       Transactions of the Philological Society,
L. Nakhleh, T. Warnow, D. Ringe, and S.N. Evans, 2005)

  Observation: Different datasets (not just different
  methods) can give different reconstructed phylogenies.

  Objective: Explore the differences in reconstructions as a
  function of data (lexical alone versus lexical,
  morphological, and phonological), screening (to remove
  obviously homoplastic characters), and methods.
  However, we use a better basic dataset (where cognancy
  judgments are more reliable).
Phylogeny reconstruction methods
•   Perfect Phylogenetic Networks (Ringe, Warnow, and Nakhleh)
•   Other network methods
•   Neighbor joining (distance-based method)
•   UPGMA (distance-based method, same as glottochronology)
•   Maximum parsimony (minimize number of changes)
•   Maximum compatibility (weighted and unweighted)
•   Gray and Atkinson (Bayesian estimation based upon
    presence/absence of cognates, as described in Nature 2003)
Phylogeny reconstruction methods
•   Perfect Phylogenetic Networks (Ringe, Warnow, and Nakhleh)
•   Other network methods
•   Neighbor joining (distance-based method)
•   UPGMA (distance-based method, same as glottochronology)
•   Maximum parsimony (minimize number of changes)
•   Maximum compatibility (weighted and unweighted)
•   Gray and Atkinson (Bayesian estimation based upon
    presence/absence of cognates, as described in Nature 2003)
           IE Languages used in the study

                         Table 1: The 24 IE languages analyzed.
             Language     Abbreviation          Language          Abbreviation
              Hittite          HI             Old English             OE
              Luvian           LU          Old High German            OG
              Lycian           LY         Classical Armenian          AR
               Vedic           VE             Tocharian A             TA
              Avestan          AV             Tocharian B             TB
            Old Persian        PE               Old Irish             OI
           Ancient Greek       GK                 Welsh              WE
               Latin           LA         Old Church Slavonic         OC
               Oscan           OS             Old Prussian            PR
             Umbrian           UM              Lithuanian             LI
              Gothic           GO                Latvian              LT
            Old Norse          ON               Albanian              AL



    The fact that the languages of our database are not contemporaneous has a possible
negative impact on the UPGMA method, since this method operates best when the evolu-
tionary process is clock-like, and all the leaves are at the same time depth. However, this
selection of our data will not necessarily negatively impact the performance of any of our
other methods. (In fact, it is advantageous to character-based methods to use the earliest
           Four IE datasets

Ringe & Taylor
• The screened full dataset of 294 characters (259
  lexical, 13 morphological, 22 phonological)
• The unscreened full dataset of 336 characters
  (297 lexical, 17 morphological, 22 phonological)
• The screened lexical dataset of 259 characters.
• The unscreened lexical dataset of 297 characters.
               Results: Likely Subgroups

Other than UPGMA, all methods reconstruct
•     the ten major subgroups
•     Anatolian + Tocharian (that under the assumption that Anatolian is the first
      daughter, then Tocharian is the second daughter)
•     Greco-Armenian (that Greek and Armenian are sisters)


Nothing else is consistently reconstructed.
In particular, the choice of data (lexical only, or also morphology and phonological)
has an impact on the final tree.
The choice of method also has an impact!
differ significantly on the datasets, and from each other.
    GA = Gray+Atkinson Bayesian
    MCMC method
*
    WMC = weighted maximum
    compatibility

    MC = maximum compatibility
    (identical to maximum parsimony
    on this dataset)

    NJ = neighbor joining (distance-
    based method, based upon
    corrected distance)

    UPGMA = agglomerative
    clustering technique used in
    glottochronology.
             Other observations
• UPGMA (i.e., the tree-building technique for
  glottochronology) does the worst (e.g. splits Italic
  and Iranian groups).
• The Satem Core (Indo-Iranian plus Balto-Slavic) is
  not always reconstructed.
• Almost all analyses put Italic, Celtic, and Germanic
  together:
   – The only exception is Weighted Maximum Compatibility
     on datasets that include highly weighted morphological
     characters.ffer significantly on the datasets, and from each other.
Different methods/data
give different answers.

    We don’t know
which answer is correct.

Which method(s)/data
  should we use?
F. Barbancon, S.N. Evans, L. Nakhleh,
D. Ringe, and T. Warnow, Diachronica
                 2013
Simulation study based on stochastic model of language evolution
(Warnow, Evans, Ringe, and Nakhleh, Cambridge University Press 2004)
• Lexical and morphological characters
• Networks with 1-3 contact edges, and also trees
• Moderate homoplasy:
     – morphology: 24% homoplastic, no borrowing
     – lexical: 13% homoplastic, 7% borrowing
• Low homoplasy:
     – morphology: no borrowing, no homoplasy;
     – lexical: 1% homoplastic, 6% borrowing
               Figure 7: Impact of the number of contact edges on phylogenetic reconstruction meth-
               ods for 300 lexical characters and 60 morphological characters, under two levels of
                   Simulation study – sample of results
               homoplasy (moderate on the left and low on the right). All datasets evolve under a
               moderate deviation from a lexical clock (dlc = 0.3) and moderate deviation from the
               rates-across-sites assumption (het = 1.2).




             Figure 8: Impact of the deviation from the rates-across-sites assumption on phyloge-
 ct edgesVarying
          on phylogenetic    reconstruction
                                       edgesfor meth-
             neticnumber  of contact
                   reconstruction  methods,              Varying
                                                 300 lexical      deviation
                                                             characters     from
                                                                        and 60    i.i.d. character
                                                                                morphological      evolution
                                                                                               char-
morphological   characters,
             acters, under twounder
                                levels two   levels of(moderate on the left and low on the right).
                                        of homoplasy
ow on the right).    All datasets
             All characters          evolve
                            evolve down       under a network with three contact edges under a
                                           a phylogenetic
  (dlc = 0.3)moderate
               and moderate
                       deviationdeviation    from
                                  from a lexical    the(dlc = 0.3). We vary het, the parameter for
                                                 clock
 ).          deviating from the rates-across-sites assumption, from low (0.6) to moderate (1.8).


               4.9 Summary
                   Observations
1. Choice of data does matter (good idea to add morphological
   characters, and to screen well).
2. Accuracy only slightly lessened with small increases in
   homoplasy, borrowing, or deviation from the lexical clock. Some
   amount of heterotachy (deviation from i.i.d.) improves accuracy.
3. Relative performance between methods consistently shows:
          Distance-based methods least accurate
          Gray and Atkinson’s method middle accuracy
          Parsimony and Compatibility methods most accurate
  Critique of the Gray and Atkinson model
• Gray and Atkinson’s model is for binary characters
  (presence/absence), not for multi-state characters.
• To use their method on multi-state data, they do a
  “binary encoding” – and so treat a single cognate class
  as a separate character, and all cognate classes for a
  single semantic slot are assumed to evolve identically
  and independently.
• This assumption is clearly violated by how languages
  evolve.
• Note: no rigorous biologist would perform the
  equivalent treatment on biological data. So this is not
  about linguistics vs. biologists.
  Critique of the Gray and Atkinson model
• Gray and Atkinson’s model is for binary characters
  (presence/absence), not for multi-state characters.
• To use their method on multi-state data, they do a
  “binary encoding” – and so treat a single cognate class
  as a separate character, and all cognate classes for a
  single semantic slot are assumed to evolve identically
  and independently.
• This assumption is clearly violated by how languages
  evolve.
• Note: no rigorous biologist would perform the
  equivalent treatment on biological data. So this is not
  about linguistics vs. biology.
  Estimating the date and homeland of the
           proto-Indo-Europeans
• Step 1: Estimate the phylogeny
• Step 2: Reconstruct words for proto-Indo-
  European (and for intermediate proto-
  languages)
• Step 3: Use archaeological evidence to
  constrain dates and geographic locations
  of the proto-languages
         Implications regarding PIE
            homeland and date
• Linguists have “reconstructed” words for ‘wool’, ‘horse’, ‘thill’
  (harness pole), and ‘yoke’, for Proto-Indo-European, for ‘wheel’ for
  the ancestor of IE minus Anatolian, and for `axle" to the ancestor of
  IE minus Anatolian and Tocharian.
• Archaeological evidence (positive and negative) for these objects
  used to constrain the date and location for proto-IE to be after the
  secondary products revolution, and somewhere with horses (wild
  or domesticated).
• Combination of evidence supports the date for PIE within 3000-5500
  BCE (some would say 3500-4500 BCE), and location not Anatolia,
  thus ruling out the Anatolian hypothesis.
               Our main points
• Biomolecular data evolve differently from linguistic data,
  and linguistic models and methods should not be based
  upon biological models.
• Better (more accurate) phylogenies can be obtained by
  formulating models and methods based upon linguistic
  scholarship, and using good data.
• Estimating dates at internal nodes requires better models
  than we have. All current approaches make strong model
  assumptions that probably do not apply to IE (or other
  language families).
• All methods, whether explicitly based upon statistical
  models or not, need to be carefully tested.
           Future research
• We need more investigation of statistical
  methods based on good stochastic
  models, as these are now the methods of
  choice in biology.
• This requires realistic parametric models
  of linguistic evolution and method
  development under these parametric
  models!
                       Modelling issues
•   What are the units?
•   Polymorphism
•   Homoplasy
•   Non-treelike evolution
•   Non-i.i.d. evolution and violations of the rates-across-sites assumption
    (heterotachy)
•   Deviation from the lexical clock (is dating even really possible?)

Note:
• The statistical model of Warnow, Evans, Ringe, and Nakhleh has homoplasy and
   reticulation, but no polymorphism.
• The bag-of-words model of Nicholls and Gray (J R. Statist. Soc.B 2008) allows for
   polymorphism but no reticulation, and has homoplasy in the form of parallel back-
   muation.
• The model of Gray and Atkinson (binary-encoding) has unlimited polymorphism
   and homoplasy, but no reticulation.
          Acknowledgements

• Financial Support: The David and Lucile Packard
  Foundation, The National Science Foundation, The
  Program for Evolutionary Dynamics at Harvard, and
  The Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Studies

• Collaborators: Don Ringe, Steve Evans, Luay
  Nakhleh, and Francois Barbançon

• Please see
  http://tandy.cs.illinois.edu/histling.html
