Basics of Multiple Sequence Alignment

            Tandy Warnow
Basics of Multiple Sequence Alignment
Tandy Warnow
Basic issues


     I Evolutionary processes operating on sequences

     I What is homology?

     I What is a correct pairwise alignment?

     I What is a correct multiple sequence alignment?

     I How to evaluate alignments

     I Fundamental limitations of nearly all multiple sequence
       alignment methods
     I Optimization problems

     I Basic techniques of standard methods

     I Performance studies of multiple sequence alignment methods
M-HMM     alignment strategies: the underlying alignments that
   A multiple sequence alignment
 profile HMMs are not modified during the process.


                   s1   -    -    -    T    A     C
                   s2   -    -    A    T    A     C
                   s3   C    -    A    -    -     G
                   s4   C    -    A    A    T     G
                   s5   C    -    -    T    -     G
                   s6   C    T    -    -    A     C
                   s7   C    -    A    T    A     C
                   s8   G    -    A    -    A     T


 e final multiple sequence alignment A of {s1 , s2 , . . . , s8 } obta
 nd A2 from Table 9.7, computing their profiles P1 and P2 (see
          Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA):
              a scientific grand challenge1

S1 = AGGCTATCACCTGACCTCCA                S1 = -AGGCTATCACCTGACCTCCA
S2 = TAGCTATCACGACCGC                    S2 = TAG-CTATCAC--GACCGC--
S3 = TAGCTGACCGC                         S3 = TAG-CT-------GACCGC--
  …                                      …
Sn = TCACGACCGACA                        Sn = -------TCAC--GACCGACA


     Novel techniques needed for scalability and accuracy
            NP-hard problems and large datasets
            Current methods do not provide good accuracy
            Few methods can analyze even moderately large datasets

     Many important applications besides phylogenetic estimation

1 Frontiers in Massive Data Analysis, National Academies Press, 2013
Homology
  Two letters in two sequences are homologous if they descend from
  a letter in a common ancestor.


                   Deletion
                                 Substitution


        …ACGGTGCAGTTACCA…
                                            Insertion
                                                          …ACGGTGCAGTTACC-A…
            …ACCAGTCACCTA…                                …AC----CAGTCACCTA…


            The	  true	  mul*ple	  alignment	  	  
                  – Reflects historical substitution, insertion, and deletion
                    events
                  – Defined using transitive closure of pairwise alignments
                    computed on edges of the true tree
Evolutionary processes operating on sequences




     I Substitutions

     I Insertions and deletions of strings (indels)

     I Rearrangements (inversions and transpositions)

     I Duplications of regions

   Note: most alignment methods stretch out sequences so that the
   line up well, and so only address substitutions and indels.
True Pairwise Alignment

     I Suppose X and Y are two sequences, and X evolves into
       sequence Y via insertions, deletions, and substitutions.
     I The true pairwise alignment of X and Y represents this true
       history.
     I Examples:
         I AAT evolves into ACCAT by the insertion of CC
         I ATGA evolves into ATTAG by changing G to T, and then
           adding G
         I CTAA evolves into CTTAA by inserting a T.


   Questions:
    1. What are the pairwise alignments?
    2. How can we guess at these evolutionary histories (and so
       pairwise alignment)?
How to evaluate methods


   Given an estimated and true (or reference alignment), we can
   compute various statistics, many of which are based on “homology
   pairs”:
     I SPFN: sum of the false negative homology pairs

     I SPFP: sum of the false positive homology pairs

     I TC: total column score

     I Compression: ratio of the estimated alignment length to true
       alignment length
     I Distance between gap length distributions
Issues to consider



     I Most methods can only handle indels and substitutions (i.e.,
       no rearrangements or duplications).
     I Most methods assume full-length sequences.

     I Statistical methods are all based on models of sequence
       evolution, and the models are limited.
     I Most methods cannot analyze very large datasets.

     I Evaluation of methods is tricky.
Edit distance and pairwise alignment




   Suppose each event (insertion, deletion, and substitution) costs 1.
   Can we compute the minimum cost edit transformation between
   two sequences?
DP algorithm for the edit distance

   Input: sequences a and b of lengths m and n, respectively.
   Output: minimum number of indels and substitutions needed to
   transform a into b.
   A two-dimensional matrix, F[0..m,0..n] is used to hold the edit
   distance values:
       F (i, j) = d(a[1..i], b[1..j]) (Definition of what we want)
       F (0, 0) = 0
       F (i, 0) = i, i = 1..m
       F (0, j) = j, j = 1..n
       For i, j ≥ 1, F [i, j] = min{
            F [i − 1, j − 1]+ if a[i]=b[j] then 0 else 1,
            F [i − 1, j] + 1,
            F [i, j − 1] + 1
            }
Needleman-Wunsch minimum edit distance

    19             2.2 Pairwise sequence alignment
                                   9.4 Edit distances and how to compute them                                199

                           0     b1     b2   ...        b j −1                    bj         . . . bn
                      0 F (0, 0)                                                   |
                     a1                                                            |
                     a2                                                            |
                                                                                   |
                    ...                                                            |
                   ai −1                           F (i − 1, j − 1)    (a)   F (i − 1, j )
                                                                                  ↓ (b)
                     ai     −       −    −    −      F (i, j − 1)     −→       F (i, j )
                                                                       (c)
                    ...

                     am

    Figure 2.4 Dynamic programming matrix used to compute an optimal global alignment. The v
      Figure 9.3 (Figure
                     for cell2.4F (i,
                                  in Huson     et al. (2010))
                                       j ) is computed          The the
                                                             from     Needleman-Wunch
                                                                           values in the dynamic     programming
                                                                                             predecessor           ap-
                                                                                                           cells, namely (a)
      proach to computing the minimum cost of any pairwise alignment (i.e., edit distance) between two
                     F (i −  1, j −   1),  (b) from    F (i −  1, j ) or (c)  from  F (i, j −  1).
      sequences, A = a1 a2 . . . am and B = b1 b2 . . . bn , under a simple gap cost model. The F(i, j) entry in
      the m × n matrix F indicates the cost of an optimal pairwise alignment between Ai and B j , where Ai
      is the ith prefix of string A and B j is the jth prefix of string B. The order in which the matrix is filled
      in requires that F(i − 1, j − 1), F(i, j − 1) and F(i − 1, j) all be computed before F(i, j) is computed
      (e.g., it can be filled
                          A inG from
                                   A aitop to bottom,Aor from A Gleft  A to
                                                                          airight). Case (a)T corresponds
                                                                                               G ai - -to a pairwise
DP algorithm for minimum edit distance




   Compute the matrix from the bottom up!
   Running time is O(mn) where the first sequence has length m and
   the second sequence has length n.
   Example: ACAT and CCGT
Finding the actual transformation - backtracing




   To find the actual transformation, use backtracing.
   Example: ACAT and CCGT
Extensions
   Minimum cost approaches:
    I How would you modify this algorithm if indels cost C and
       substitutions cost C 0 ?
    I How would you modify the edit distance algorithm if a indel of
       length p has cost C + C 0 p?
   Maximize similarity approaches:
    I How would you modify the algorithm to maximize score, so
       matches have value 1 and mismatches and indels each have
       negative value -1 (i.e., they cost)?
    I How would you modify the algorithm to maximize score,
       where matches and mismatches have scores (possibly
       negative) that depend on the pair of letters, and indels all
       have negative scores?
    I How would you modify the algorithm if you want a local
       alignment (maximize cut off some prefix and suffix)
   More generally,
    I How would you align two alignments?
Extending to multiple alignment




   Now that we have a way of defining the “cost” of a pairwise
   alignment, how can we extend to a set of three or more sequences?
Optimization criteria



   Three criteria, two of which are extensions of edit distances:
     I Sum-of-pairs (sum of edit distances on induced pairwise
       alignments)
     I Tree alignment (sum of costs of edges)

     I Maximum likelihood under a statistical model of sequence
       evolution
   All three are NP-hard, even if the tree is given.
Treelength

   Just like parsimony, but allows indels!
     I Fixed tree version: Given unaligned sequences at the leaves of
       a fixed tree, finding the sequences at internal nodes to
       minimize the cost.
     I Another fixed tree version: given aligned sequences at the
       leaves of the tree, find the sequences at internal nodes to
       minimize the cost.
     I Generalized Tree Alignment problem (Sankoff): given
       unaligned sequences, find the tree and sequences at inernal
       nodes to minimize the cost.
   All are NP-hard.
   Methods for Treelength include POY and BeeTLe.
   Very computationally intensive (worse than MP) ...and also
   controversial!
Example 9.5 from textbook



   The input is s1 = AC , s2 = ATAC , s3 = CAG . We seek the
   sequence X at the internal node of the tree with s1 , s2 , and s3 at
   the leaves.
    1. Compute the pairwise alignments obtained on each edge for
       X = AC .
    2. Compute the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) defined by
       the pairwise alignments computed in (1).
    3. Compute the SOP-score of the MSA computed in (2).
    4. Compute the treelength of the MSA computed in (2).
Tree Alignment




   The (Fixed) Tree Alignment problem (finding the sequences at
   internal nodes of a fixed tree to find the minimum cost) is NP-hard.
Generalized Tree Alignment



     I Input:   Set S of sequences and positive constants C and C 0 ,
       where C is the cost of a single letter indel and C 0 is the cost
       for a substitution.
     I Output:    Tree T with S at the leaves and internal nodes
       labelled by sequences so that the treelength is minimized.
   The Generalized Tree Alignment problem is also NP-hard.
   Methods for Treelength include POY and BeeTLe, but these are
   heuristics without provable guarantees. Furthermore, they are
   computationally intensive.
Constraining the input sequences in GTA



     I Input:   Set S of sequences and positive constants C and C 0 ,
       where C is the cost of a single letter indel and C 0 is the cost
       for a substitution.
     I Output:    Tree T with S at the leaves and internal nodes
       labelled by sequences so that the treelength is minimized.
   What happens if we constrain the sequences at the internal nodes
   to be drawn from S?
   Can we solve this problem in polynomial time?
Minimum Spanning Tree


  Given a graph G = (V , E ) with positive weights on the edges of
  G , a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) is a subgraph of G that
  contains all the vertices and that has minimum total cost.
  Finding the MST is solvable in polynomial time (Kruskal’s
  Algorithm and Prim’s Algorithm).
  Let the vertices of the graph be all the sequences in S, and the
  weight of the edge between two vertices be the edit distance
  (computed by Needleman-Wunsch).
  Hence, we can find an optimal solution to the constrained GTA
  problem in polynomial time.
Tree Alignments

   Let T be a tree with leaves labelled by S and let S 0 be the
   assignment of sequences to the internal nodes in T . Then (T , S 0 )
   defines a multiple sequence alignment A. Tree alignments are
   those alignments that can be obtained in this way.
   We are given a set S of sequences, and we wish to find an
   approximate solution to the Generalized Tree Alignment (GTA)
   problem.
   Specifically, we say an algorithm Φ for GTA is a c-approximation
   algorithm if the GTA score of Φ(S) is no more than c times the
   best possible score.
   Theorem 9.6 from the textbook: A minimum spanning tree T
   is a 2-approximation to the GTA problem.
Likelihood-based approaches



   Just like GTR maximum likelihood or GTR Bayesian methods, but
   allows indels!
   A model tree will include parameters for the probability of an indel
   and its length.
   Different problems:
     I estimate the alignment given the tree,

     I estimate the tree given the alignment, or

     I co-estimate the alignment and tree.
Statistical alignment estimation


   Some alignment methods are based on explicit parametric models
   of sequence evolution that include insertions and deletions (indels)
   as well as substitutions. Examples:
     I BAli-Phy

     I StatAlign

     I Prank

     I PAGAN


   The good: appealing statistical proeprties
   The bad: more computationally intensive than standard MSA
   methods, and they don’t work as well as expected.
Profile Hidden Markov Models




   Profile Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are another kind of
   statistical model in frequent use in multiple sequence alignment.
   We will discuss them in detail later.
Aligning a set S of sequences




   Suppose S is a set of unaligned sequences and we are told they are
   all homologous (i.e., share a common evolutionary history) with
   the sequences in a family F.
   How shall we compute a multiple sequence alignment for S?
Basic techniques


   Multiple sequence alignment methods generally use one or more of
   the following techniques to align a set S of sequences:
     I Align all sequences in S to a single sequence s ∗ or to a model
       (e.g., profile HMM)
     I Progressive alignment: compute a guide tree, and then
       align sequences from the bottom up
     I Consistency: infer support for homology between two letters
       using third sequences
     I Divide-and-conquer (especially based on a tree)

     I Iteration between tree estimation and alignment estimation
Aligning a set S of homologous sequences




    I Compute an MSA A for the sequences in F.

    I Build the profile HMM H for the alignment A.

    I Add all the sequences in S to A, independently.

    I The alignment produced will contain all the sequences of
      F ∪ S; you can then restrict to just the sequences in S.
Progressive Alignment




    I Given sequences S, find rooted tree (somehow)

    I Align sequences from the bottom up (note this requires the
      ability to align two alignments)
    I Return the alignment produced at the root
Progressive Alignment
    I Build a guide tree from the sequences

    I Align the sequences from the bottom-up (aligning alignments
      as
       21
          you go  up)
              2.3 Multiple sequence alignment




       Figure 2.7   Outline of the progressive alignment approach. For a given set of input sequences (a), a
                    distance matrix is computed (b), and from this a phylogenetic guide tree is derived (c).
                    Then, sequences at the leaves of the tree are aligned to produce profiles at the internal
Aligning alignments


   In a progressive alignment, alignments on disjoint sets are aligned
   together, to make an alignment on the combined set of sequences.
   To do this, the two alignments are first represented by profiles, and
   then these profiles are aligned to each other.
   This is performed using dynamic programming, similar to
   Needleman-Wunsch.
   Examples of methods that can align two alignments include Opal
   and Muscle.
   However, another approach is to represent each of the alignments
   as profile HMMs, and then align the two profile HMMs.
Using libraries of pairwise alignments, part 1



   Suppose we have a set S of sequences, and a library L of pairwise
   alignments for the sequences in S.
   For each pair x, y of letters (one from each of two sequences), you
   have the frequency with which the two letters are aligned in L (i.e.,
   the support for the homology pair x, y ).
   Given a library of pairwise alignments, we can define the support
   for all homology pairs, and then seek the best MSA for these
   support values.
Using libraries of pairwise alignments, part 2


   The consistency technique is another way of using a library L
   of pairwise alignments.
   Another way of defining the support for the homology pair is the
   number of letters z (in a third sequence) such that x and z and y
   and z are aligned in some pairwise alignments in P.
   This is how “consistency” is defined – support via a third sequence.
   Many of the best MSA methods (e.g., T-Coffee and ProbCons) use
   the consistency technique in some way, and differ mainly in how
   they construct the library.
Comparing alignment methods




                      1000-taxon models, ordered by difficulty (Liu et al., 2009)




  Evolutionary rates increase from left-to-right!
Divide-and-conquer using trees, cont.

   The main objective of divide-and-conquer is to scale good MSA
   methods to larger datasets, so that they are more accurate or can
   analyze larger datasets.
     I Build a guide tree (perhaps by computing pairwise edit
       distances and then a tree based on the distances)
     I Divide sequence dataset into disjoint subsets using the guide
       tree
                    9.13 Co-estimation of alignments and trees   217
     I Align subsets

     I Align alignments together (e.g., profile-profile alignment)
One SATé/PASTA iteration


                     SATé variants differ only in the
                        decomposition strategy
           A           C
                                 Decompose    A   B
                                  dataset     C   D
            B          D

                                                      Align subsets


                                                        A    B
                                                        C    D
                 Estimate ML
                                                      Merge
                tree on merged         ABCD
                                                  sub-alignments
                   alignment
Iteration between MSA and tree estimation
                       SATé-1 (Science 2009) performance




1000-taxon models, ordered by difficulty – rate of evolution generally increases from left to right



                        SATé-1 24 hour analysis, on desktop machines
                        (Similar improvements for biological datasets)
                        SATé-1 can analyze up to about 8,000 sequences.
  SATé-1 and SATé-2 (Systematic Biology, 2012)




                                                 SATé-1: up to 8K
                                                 SATé-2: up to ~50K




1000-taxon models ranked by difficulty
                             Tree accuracy
                                                                             1 million sequences:

                                                                                  •   PASTA finished one
                                                                                      iteration in 15 days

                                                                                  •   PASTA tree had 6% error,
                                                                                      compared to 5.6% when
                                                                                      using true alignment

                                                                                  •   Starting tree had 8.4% error
Figure 3.3: Tree error rates on nucleotide datasets. We show missing
branch (also known as false negative or FN) rates for maximum likelihood trees
estimated using FastTree-II, on the reference alignment as well as alignments
computed using PASTA and other methods; results not shown indicate failure
to complete within 24 hours using 12 cores on the datasets. Error bars show
standard error over 10 replicates for all model conditions of the Indelible and
the 10,000-sequence RNASim datasets.                            10

                                      82
Summary



  Accurate large-scale MSA estimation is challenging!


  But various techniques can help improve accuracy and scalability,
  including:
    I divide-and-conquer

    I iteration

    I consistency

    I statistical methods
